== Exocortex ==

Exocortex is your external memory and your world representation. As user application, exocortex is a coordinator
of agent swarm, doing tasks on your behalf in all reaches of the internets. You can instruct agents to aggregate
information from other sources into your exocortex and to publish your information to other media.
This swarm implements centralised-decentralised model — whatever you want to publish is generated centrally by you,
in your favourite application, in your home environment, then agents can publish, transfer, upload, and share your data
across the net to blogs, video services, additional shadow storage etc. In the same manner, whatever agents find out,
can be brought to one of your devices and then seamlessly synced between all your devices forming the exocortex.
This way you do not have to go for the news, the news come to you.
At the same time, things you create are bound to you centrally, as they are emitted from your exocortex and maintain
your identity integrity — once you update something, you do not have to go out and update that bit everywhere, it is
synced much like p2p networks share data.

=== Пользователи ===

Пользователи соединены в социальные "круги" или сети. Фильтрация происходит через пользователей первого круга -
непосредственных "друзей", мнение которых вы учитываете. Концепция первого круга рекомендателей ортогональна правам
доступа, поэтому в первом круге находятся именно люди, могущие что-то порекомендовать, видеть весь ваш контент им
совершенно необязательно.

Пользователи, с которыми не происходит никаких взаимодействий, постепенно вытесняются на более периферийные круги.
Пользователя можно зафиксировать в определенном круге, нажав кнопочку Pin и введя пояснение (зачем - нужно расписать
более подробно, например, не интересно читать, но нужно пролистывать информацию от, к примеру, директора конкурирующей
фирмы, чтобы быть в курсе).

=== Контент ===

Контент постится в стиле тумблр-а[1], разными типами записей, картинка, текст, ссылка и т.д.[2] Текст может быть страницей
или целой статьей с типографским форматированием. При просмотре каждый пользователь может проаннотировать страницу
(а-ля Гуззи), поставить свои теги. Теги добавляются в глобальный пул, совпадающие теги от разных пользователей получают
больший вес. Рекомендательные связи между пользователями, поставившими одинаковые теги, усиливаются, увеличивая вероят-
ность взаимных рекомендаций.

[1] http://skitch.com/berkus/n34yy/tumblr
[2] Text, Photo, Quote, Link, Chat, Audio, Video

=== Рекомендации ===

Рекомендации бывают прямые адресные (кто-то посоветовал что-то тебе), прямые общие (кто-то посоветовал что-то всем) и
косвенные (кто-то отметил что-то как интересное, отметив его звездочкой, прорейтинговав или добавив в избранное, нажав,
к примеру, Favourite на ютубе или добавив в wishlist на амазоне). Пользователь может оценить рекомендацию в стиле
bitchun, одобрив, проигнорировав или отказавшись от неё. Результат влияет на последующие рекомендации такого типа от
того же пользователя, таким образом строится сеть влияния рекомендаций.

=== Контексты ===

http://www.remem.org/ The Remembrance Agent - Context data miner.
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Memex - Associative trails

Contexts - the kind of activity you have at your computer. For example, a Chat
context would definitely enable all popups
and sounds and open multiple chat windows and have a browser preloaded in case
your peers share some links.
On the other hand a Presentation context will suppress all popups (your
colleagues love to see these "Oh, honey, it was such a great sex last night"
bubbles during presentations or even worse, don't they?), set your status as DND
everywhere, suppress sounds and other programs like wifi password dialogs - all
you don't need to get in the way when giving presentation.
A Screensaver context would kick in when screensaver activates or you lock the
screen manually. It will set you to Away everywhere (or even Not Available -
depending on options available in particular IM protocol), it will reserve whole
screen space for running the screensaver app - no more popups _getting through
the screensaver_ like it sometimes happens on X11 with badly written apps, and
run it with specified process priority.
You can have a Browsing context for example, too. It will fire up your favourite
browser(s), have it open the sites you read regularly without need to reopen
tabs or load a saved web profile manually.

Hope you can see the power of contexts already.

=== Данные ===

Данные в экзокортексе неявно и постоянно сохраняются. Возможно явно забыть данные, но не их связи, и при повторном
обращении данные снова будут скачаны и сохранены локально.

"Ambient communication". You don't really have "programs" for communication, the
protocol handlers will install at lower level and communicate using a low-level
Common Protocol similar to Telepathy-on-top-of-DBus.

The user interface part of this communication can be manyfold, for example
there's a notion of centralised contact list called (surprise) the Address Book,
dubbed Contacts in Metta, because it contains entities you are communicating with.

Address Book gathers all contact
information about your peers, so it's just as easy to send an osdev forum PM,
SMS or a gtalk message from the same address book entry. Mail or incoming
messages handling is done in the same way - you can open your contact in address
book and see through recent history or unread, incoming or even dig deeper for
older messages from them. Much like gmail interface keeps track of your
conversations, address book is the entry point to everything that happens
between you two. Even more - a group of people, such as a skype group chat or
IRC chat room. Or your organization's structural unit, which is no different. Of
course, there will be a way to stay alert of current incoming conversations,
with popups and sounds and however else you configure it for yourself.
Your peers are connected into a social graph, with multiple levels and different
relations between them and other entities.


=== Обмен данными ===

@sa devices interchanging data when in proximity. find url.


-- перенесено из Architecture.txt --

amines — little agents that bind social services to exocortex.
Mettamphetamine - main driver
Dopplamine - doppler binding
Twittamine - twitter binding etc
Tryptamine - googlewave binding? :D


Xanadu 17 rules:
* Every Xanadu server is uniquely and securely identified.
* Every Xanadu server can be operated independently or in a network.
* Every user is uniquely and securely identified.
* Every user can search, retrieve, create and store documents.
* Every document can consist of any number of parts each of which may be of any data type.
* Every document can contain links of any type including virtual copies ("transclusions") to any other document in the system accessible to its owner.
* Links are visible and can be followed from all endpoints.
* Permission to link to a document is explicitly granted by the act of publication.
* Every document can contain a royalty mechanism at any desired degree of granularity to ensure payment on any portion accessed, including virtual copies ("transclusions") of all or part of the document.
* Every document is uniquely and securely identified.
* Every document can have secure access controls.
* Every document can be rapidly searched, stored and retrieved without user knowledge of where it is physically stored.
* Every document is automatically moved to physical storage appropriate to its frequency of access from any given location.
* Every document is automatically stored redundantly to maintain availability even in case of a disaster.
* Every Xanadu service provider can charge their users at any rate they choose for the storage, retrieval and publishing of documents.
* Every transaction is secure and auditable only by the parties to that transaction.
* The Xanadu client-server communication protocol is an openly published standard. Third-party software development and integration is encouraged.
