"Ambient communication". You don't really have "programs" for communication, the
protocol handlers will install at lower level and communicate using a low-level
Common Protocol similar to Telepathy-on-top-of-DBus.

The user interface part of this communication can be manyfold, for example
there's a notion of centralised contact list called (surprise) the Address Book,
dubbed Contacts in Metta, because it contains entities you are communicating with.

Address Book gathers all contact
information about your peers, so it's just as easy to send an osdev forum PM,
SMS or a gtalk message from the same address book entry. Mail or incoming
messages handling is done in the same way - you can open your contact in address
book and see through recent history or unread, incoming or even dig deeper for
older messages from them. Much like gmail interface keeps track of your
conversations, address book is the entry point to everything that happens
between you two. Even more - a group of people, such as a skype group chat or
IRC chat room. Or your organization's structural unit, which is no different. Of
course, there will be a way to stay alert of current incoming conversations,
with popups and sounds and however else you configure it for yourself.

Another nifty thing I'm thinking of is Contexts - the kind of activity you have
at your computer. For example, a Chat context would definitely enable all popups
and sounds and open multiple chat windows and have a browser preloaded in case
your peers share some links.
On the other hand a Presentation context will suppress all popups (your
colleagues love to see these "Oh, honey, it was such a great sex last night"
bubbles during presentations or even worse, don't they?), set your status as DND
everywhere, suppress sounds and other programs like wifi password dialogs - all
you don't need to get in the way when giving presentation.
A Screensaver context would kick in when screensaver activates or you lock the
screen manually. It will set you to Away everywhere (or even Not Available -
depending on options available in particular IM protocol), it will reserve whole
screen space for running the screensaver app - no more popups _getting through
the screensaver_ like it sometimes happens on X11 with badly written apps, and
run it with specified process priority.
You can have a Browsing context for example, too. It will fire up your favourite
browser(s), have it open the sites you read regularly without need to reopen
tabs or load a saved web profile manually.

Hope you can see the power of contexts already.
