== Metta architecture description ==

Metta is an exocortex OS: it is your external memory and social interaction agent. This is the primary task aside from
the additional multimedia and mobile assistant abilities. As an exocortex, OS's task is to provide means and ends to
sharing and gathering relevant information for you.

As an information gathering assistant the OS must support receiving, filtering, classifying and presenting relevant
information in a suitable form.

As an information sharing assistant the OS must support specifying privacy levels, distributing the secure storage,
publishing directly to your peers and to other media.

To provide this level of service, the key implementation principles are:

* It must be possible to distribute work and storage seamlessly between trusted nodes on the user's network.
* It must be possible to easily add and remove nodes from the trusted network.
* Information should be synchronized between nodes whenever possible.
* It should not be possible to bring down the node by overwhelming it with work: QoS guarantees must be agreed upon.
* Storage should be associative, not hierarchical. Cross-node links must be possible with full semantic relation data.
* Your data must be redundant, highly available and securely stored. "Publish once, share everywhere".
* Processing of multimedia and semantically meaningful data must be fast and lean.

Principles lead to technical requirements for the OS:

* QoS management on all levels in the system. Agents must be able to negotiate necessary resources and OS must maintain
promised resource guarantees.
* Highly componentised and sandboxed system. When executing agents on behalf of other users it is crucial to provide
data security for your own and for their data.
* Low system management overhead.


== Implementation details ==

Metta is implemented as a Single Address Space OS, for QoS management it uses technologies found in Nemesis OS,
part of Pegasus project from the University of Cambridge.

Implementation consists of kickstart, glue code, trusted computing base components, library components and applications.
Applications are vertically integrated - they perform most of the management themselves, which gives them high adaptivity
and provides QoS guarantees by removing contention in services usually done by the OS, which often become bottlenecks.

Common functionality is implemented as library components, which give standard tested implementations of many functions
needed by applications in Metta environment, and also save memory by sharing code and static data between applications.


== Kickstart ==

Kickstart does all preinitialization work needed to get system going - it creates a system privileged domain, initializes
the MMU and boots processors, then gives control to the boot modules loader. Module loader will resolve module dependencies,
determine load order and load the TCB modules — these are the most important system modules, always trusted by other
components.


== Glue code ==

Glue code performs only a minimally necessary subset of operations that require privileged CPU mode. This includes
manipulating MMU tables and switching protection domains. This code is therefore not preemptible.

Code exists in glue layer for a number of reasons:
- code is privileged and therefore needs to execute with supervisor permissions,
- code is executed because of exception or interrupt and therefore needs to be both privileged and uninterruptible,
- code is generally used and needs to run atomically/uninterruptible.

Interrupts are also implemented as stubs in glue code, due to their privileged nature.

Some glue code syscalls are privileged and can be used only by members of the TCB, others are used by application
processes to request work from other domains.


== Trusted Computing Base ==

TCB components implement features absolutely necessary for application functioning and therefore define the OS kernel.

Kernel components have almost no private data, on which contention could arise. Most of the data for kernel calls
is provided by the process engaged in the syscall, therefore not affecting service of other processes.
This also helps API atomicity.

Components export functionality through one or more strongly-typed interfaces. Kernel and userspace components are
accessed via interfaces alike.

An interface definition language is used to specify the types, exceptions and methods of an interface,
and a run-time typesystem allows the narrowing of types and the marshaling of parameters for non-local procedure
invocations.

A name-space scheme (based on Plan-9 contexts) allows implementations of interfaces to be published and a trader
component from the TCB may be used to find component(s) exporting a particular interface type or instance.


== IDC ==

The only default mean of inter-domain communication is Event. Sending an event is a relatively lightweight operation,
upon which many other syncronization and communication primitives may be built.


--------8<--------imaginary cut line--------8<--------do not cross-------->8--------imaginary cut line-------->8--------


Dynamic loader (Sjofn), similar to OMOS server, is used to perform component relocation and linking. Employed memory
and loading models allow to share code and static data between all domains efficiently.

meta-objects (in omos sense) are used to create generator interfaces which instantiate modules, used by application.

